Friendship is one mind in two bodies.
Sincerity is the way to heaven.
When Heaven is about to confer a great office on a man, it first exercises his mind with suffering, and his sinews and bones with toil ; it exposes his body to hunger, and subjects him to extreme poverty ; it confounds his undertakings. By all these methods it stimulates his mind, hardens his nature, and supplies his incompetencies.
If you know the point of balance, You can settle the details. If you can settle the details, You can stop running around. Your mind will become calm. If your mind becomes calm, You can think in front of a tiger. If you can think in front of a tiger, You will surely succeed.
The disease of men is that they neglect their own fields and go to weed the fields of others.
The feeling of compassion is the beginning of humanity.
Never has a man who has bent himself been able to make others straight.
The great man is he who does not lose his child's heart.
If the King loves music, it is well with the land.
Evil exists to glorify the good. Evil is negative good. It is a relative term. Evil can be transmuted into good. What is evil to one at one time, becomes good at another time to somebody else.
If you love men and they are unfriendly, look into your love; if you rule men and they are unruly, look into your wisdom; if you are courteous to them and they do not respond, look into your courtesy. If what you do is vain, always seek within.
I dislike death, however, there are some things I dislike more than death. Therefore, there are times when I will not avoid danger.
People are eager to comment on something when they themselves are not in the situation of doing it.
Charity is in the heart of man, and righteousness in the path of men. Pity the man who has lost his path and does not follow it and who has lost his heart and does not know how to recover it. When people's dogs and chicks are lost they go out and look for them and yet the people who have lost their hearts do not go out and look for them. The principle of self-cultivation consists in nothing but trying to look for the lost heart.
Treat your elders as elders, and extend it to the elders of others; treat your young ones as young ones, and extend it to the young ones of others; then you can turn the whole world in the palm of your hand
The best things in life come in threes, like friends, dreams, and memories.
Try your best to treat others as you would wish to be treated yourself, and you will find that this is the shortest way to benevolence
He who respects others is respected by them.
He who attends to his greater self becomes a great man, and he who attends to his smaller self becomes a small man.
When Heaven is about to confer a great office upon you, it first exercises your mind with suffering and your sinews and bones with toil.
A great man is one who has not lost the child's heart.
The tendency of mans nature to good is like the tendency of water to flow downward.
Kindly words do not enter so deeply into men as a reputation for kindness.
The fruit of humanity is devotion to one's parents. The fruit of righteousness is to respect one's elders. The fruit of wisdom is to understand these two and not to betray them. The fruit of propriety is to regulate and polish them. The fruit of music is the joy that comes from rejoicing in them. When one rejoices in them, they grow. When they grow, how can they be stopped? And when they cannot be stopped, unconsciously one's feet begin to dance and one's arms begin to wave.
One who believes all of a book would be better off without books
When I say that all men have the mind which cannot bear to see the suffering of others, my meaning is illustrated this way: when two men suddenly see a child about to fall into a well, they all have a feeling of alarm and distress, not to gain friendship with the child's parents, nor to seek the praise of their neighbors and friends. From such a case, we see that a man without the feeling of commiseration is not a man. The feeling of commiseration is the beginning of humanity.
A real man is he whose goodness is a part of himself.
There is no greater delight than to be conscious of sincerity on self-examination.
Men must be decided on what they will not do, and then they are able to act with vigor in what they ought to do.
It is true that water will flow indifferently to east and west, but will it flow equally well up and down? Human nature is disposed toward goodness, just as water tends to flow downwards. There is no water but flows downwards, and no man but shows his tendency to be good. Now, by striking water hard, you may splash it higher than your forehead, and by damming it, you may make it go uphill. But, is that the nature of water? It is external force that causes it to do so. Likewise, if a man is made to do what is not good, his nature is being similarly forced.
If you let people follow their feelings, they will be able to do good. This is what is meant by saying that human nature is good.
By exhaustively examining one's own mind,one may understand his nature.One who understands his own nature understands Heaven.
Secure property in hand leads to peace in mind.
A small country cannot contend with a great; the few cannot contend with the many; the weak cannot contend with the strong
A man must first despise himself, and then others will despise him.
Benevolence is one of the distinguishing characters of man.
Let not a man do what his sense of right bids him not to do, nor desire what it forbids him to desire. This is sufficient. The skillful artist will not alter his measures for the sake of a stupid workman.
Friends are the siblings God never gave us.
He who exerts his mind to the utmost knows his nature
The Way lies at hand yet it is sought afar off; the thing lies in the easy yet it is sought in the difficult.
The path of duty lies in what is near, and men seek for it in what is remote; the work of duty lies in what is easy, and men seek for it in what is difficult.
Friendship with a man is friendship with his virtue, and does not admit of assumptions of superiority.
The Tao is near and people seek it far away.
The sole concern of learning is to seek one's original heart.
He who goes to the bottom of his own heart knows his own nature; 
There is a power in everything; it is the job of the artist to determine it and express it.
The gap between enthusiasm and indifference is filled with failures. The great man is he that does not lose his child's heart.
The man of true greatness never loses his child's heart.
All people have the common desire to be elevated in honour, but all people have something still more elevated in themselves without knowing it.
Human nature is disposed to do good.
The feeling of right or wrong is the beginning of wisdom
The way is near, but men seek it afar. It is in easy things, but men seek for it in difficult things.
Is it only the mouth and belly which are injured by hunger and thirst? Men's minds are also injured by them.
Never has there been one possessed of complete sincerity who did not move others. Never has there been one who had not sincerity who was able to move others.
The way is One and only One. The way is close at hand, but men seek it afar.
It is not difficult to govern. All one has to do is not to offend the noble families.
Human nature is good, just as water seeks low ground. There is no man who is not good, just as there is no water that does not flow downward.
If you know that a thing is unrighteous, then use all dispatch in putting an end to it--why wait till next year?
Incessant falls teach men to reform, and distress rouses their strength. Life springs from calamity, and death from ease.
To lay hold of the mean without taking into account the occasion is like grasping one thing only.
In abundance prepare for scarcity.
The five kinds of grains are considered good plants, but if the grains are not ripe, they are worse than cockles. It is the same with regard to kindness, which must grow into maturity.
Every duty is a charge, but the charge of oneself is the root of all others.
The great person never loses a childlike spirit.
Mankind fears an evil man but heaven does not.
Where it is permissible both to die and not to die, it is an abuse of valour to die.
There is the work of great men and there is the work of little men. Therefore it is said, 'Some labor with their minds and some labor with their strength. Those who labor with their minds govern others; those who labor with their strength are governed by others.'1 Those who are governed by others support them; those who govern them are supported by them. This is a universal principle.
Water indeed will flow indifferently to the east or west, but will it flow indifferently up or down? The tendency of our nature to good is like the tendency of water to flow downwards. There are none but have this tendency to good, just as all water flows downward.
Never lose your child's heart.
All things are already complete in us. There is no greater delight than to be conscious of right within us. If one strives to treat others as he would be treated by them, he shall not fail to come near the perfect life.
The ways are two: love and want of love. That is all.
The great man does not think beforehand of his words that they may be sincere, nor of his actions that they may be resolute- he simply speaks and does what is right.
A man must not be without shame, for the shame of being without shame is shamelessness indeed.
The poor attend to their own virtue in solitude.
All things are complete within ourselves.
Heaven sees as the people see. Heaven hears as the people hear.
To act without clear understanding, to form habits without investigation, to follow a path all one's life without knowing where it really leads; such is the behavior of the multitude.
The people turn in allegiance to Humanity, as surely as water flows downward or as a wild animal takes cover in the wilderness.
Virtue alone is not sufficient for the exercise of government; laws alone cannot carry themselves into practice.
When one by force subdues men, they do not submit to him in heart. They submit because their strength is not adequate to resist.
The way of truth is like a great road. It is not difficult to know it. The evil is only that men will not seek it.
He who loves others is constantly loved by them. He who respects others is constantly respected by them.
To feed men and not to love them is to treat them as if they were barnyard cattle. To love them and not respect them is to treat them as if they were household pets.
Those who follow the part of themselves which is great are great men; those who follow the part which is little are little men.
The myriad things are complete in us. There is no greater joy than to reflect on ourselves and become sincere.
Only those who develop their minds and spirits to the utmost can serve Heaven and fulfill their own destinies.
He who wishes to be benevolent will not be rich.
The way of truth is like a great highway. It is not hard to find.
Listen to a man's words and look at the pupil of his eye. How can a man conceal his character?
Sincerity is the way to heaven; to think how to be sincere is the way of man.
The foundation of the world lies in the nation. The foundation of the nation lies in the family. The foundation of the family lies in the individual.
If the prince of a State love benevolence, he will have no opponent in all the empire.
He who outrages benevolence is called a ruffian: he who outrages righteousness is called a villain. I have heard of the cutting off of the villain Chow, but I have not heard of the putting of a ruler to death.
Only when someone refuses to do certain things will he be capable of doing great things.
The way of learning is none other than finding the lost mind.
So I like life and I like righteousness; if I cannot keep the two together, I will let life go and choose righteousness.
Truth uttered before its time is dangerous.
The regular path of virtue is to be pursued without any bend, and from no view to emolument.
The root of the kingdom is in the state. The root of the state is in the family. The root of the family is in the person of its head.
The feeling of commiseration is the beginning of humanity; the feeling of shame and dislike is the beginning of righteousness; the feeling of deference and compliance is the beginning of propriety; and the feeling of right or wrong is the beginning of wisdom.Men have these Four Beginnings just as they have their four limbs. Having these Four Beginnings, but saying that they cannot develop them is to destroy themselves.